Installation generic x86 x64: add steps (#29997)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_includes/installation/operating_system.md

The BIOS configuration is now complete.

## Write HAOS onto your x86-64 hardware

Next, you need to write the Home Assistant Operating System image to the *boot medium*, which is the medium your x86-64 hardware will boot from when it is running Home Assistant.

<div class='note'>
HAOS has no integrated installer that writes the image automatically. You will write it manually using either the <b>Disks</b> utility from Ubuntu or Balena Etcher.
</div>

Typically, an internal medium like S-ATA hard disk, S-ATA SSD, M.2 SSD, or a non-removable eMMC is used for the x86-64 boot medium. Alternatively, an external medium can be used such as a USB SDD, though this is not recommended.

To write the HAOS image to the boot medium on your x86-64 hardware, there are 2 different methods:

>   **Method 1**: Recommended method. It also works on laptops and PCs with internal hard disks. This method boots Ubuntu from a USB flash drive and installs the Home Assistant Operating System from there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **Method 1 (recommended)**: Boot Ubuntu from a USB flash drive and install the Home Assistant Operating System from there. It also works on laptops and PCs with internal hard disks.
```

>   **Method 2**: With this method, you write the Home Assistant Operating disk image directly onto a boot medium. The steps are a bit more complex. If you have non-removable internal mediums (for example because you are using a laptop) or do not have the necessary adapter (for example an USB to eMMC adapter) use method 1 instead.

Reviewer: I've not seen removable eMMC on x86-64 so far. A better example would be USB to S-ATA adapter here.

```suggestion
  **Method 2**: With this method, you write the Home Assistant Operating disk image directly onto a boot medium from your regular computer. The steps are a bit more complex. If you have non-removable internal mediums (for example because you are using a laptop) or do not have the necessary adapter (for example an USB to S-ATA adapter) use method 1 instead.
```

### Method 1: Installing HAOS via Ubuntu booting from a USB flash drive

#### Required material

- Computer
- The target x86-64 hardware, on which you want to install the Home Assistant Operating System (HAOS)
- USB flash drive (USB thumb drive is sufficient, it should be at least 4&nbsp;GB in size)
- Internet connection

#### To install HAOS via Ubuntu from a USB flash drive

1. **Notice**: This procedure will write the Home Assistant Operating System onto your device.
   - This means you will lose all the data as well as the previously installed operating system.

>    - Back up your data before continuing with the next step.

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing here, as we install Ubuntu first on a USB stick. It is not wrong per-se, but I think I would prefer this warning just before the writing operation in step 7. :thinking:

Author: rephrased. I think it is good to be aware of this before starting the process.

2. Create a *live operating system* on a USB flash drive:

>    - Follow the ([Ubuntu instructions](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/try-ubuntu-before-you-install) on writing an Ubuntu iso file onto a USB device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Follow the [Ubuntu instructions](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/try-ubuntu-before-you-install) on writing an Ubuntu iso file onto a USB device.
```

3. Insert the USB flash drive into the system on which you want to run Home Assistant.

>    - Boot the live operating system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Boot the live operating system.
   - You might need to adjust boot order or use F10 (might be a different F-key depending on the BIOS) to select the USB flash drive as boot device.
```

4. When prompted, make sure to select **Try Ubuntu**. This runs Ubuntu on the USB flash device.
   - The system then starts Ubuntu.
   - Connect your system to your network and make sure it has internet access.
5. In Ubuntu, open a browser and open [this procedure](/installation/generic-x86-64).

>    - From there, [download the image][generic-x86-64] to your computer.

Reviewer: "your computer" could refer the PC you initially started with. I'd drop it to make it "relative" (download to Ubuntu)

```suggestion
   - From there, [download the image][generic-x86-64].
```

6. In Ubuntu, in the bottom left corner, select **Show Applications**.
7. In the applications, search and open **Disks** and start restoring the HOAS image:
   1. In **Disks**, on the left side, select the internal disk device you want to install HAOS onto.
   2. On top of the screen, select the three dots menu and select **Restore Disk Image...**.
      ![Restore disk image: select three dots menu](/images/installation/ubuntu_restore_disk_image.png)
   3. Select the image you just downloaded.
      ![Restore disk image: select image](/images/installation/select_haos.png)
   4. Select **Start Restoring...**.
      ![Restore disk image: start restoring](/images/installation/start_restoring.png)
   5. Confirm by selecting **Restore**.
      ![Restore disk image: select Restore](/images/installation/restore.png)
      - If you are getting an **Error unmounting filesystem** error message, stating that the **target is busy**:
      - Most likely, you are running Ubuntu on your internal disk. Instead, you need to run it on your stick.
        - Go back to step 3 and during start up, make sure you select **Try Ubuntu** (and NOT **Install Ubuntu**).

>    6. In the partitions overview, you should now see the **hassos-boot** partition.

Reviewer: Afaik, the `hassos-boot` partition only really becomes visible once flashing succeeded. We can be more generic here:
```suggestion
   6. In the partitions overview, you should now see the restore operation in progress.
```

      - The Home Assistant Operating System is now being installed on your system.
        ![Restore disk image: Restoring...](/images/installation/haos_restoring.png)

> 8. Once the Home Assistant Operating System is installed, remove the external USB flash drive and shut down the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Once the Home Assistant Operating System is installed, shut down the system.
```

>    - Your Home Assistant server is now set up and you can start using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Once Ubuntu has been shut down, remove the USB flash drive (Ubuntu will inform you when this is the case).
   - Your Home Assistant server is now set up and you can start using it.
```

The BIOS configuration is now complete.

## Write HAOS onto your x86-64 hardware

Next, we need to write the Home Assistant Operating System image to the "boot medium", which is the medium your x86-64 hardware will boot from when it is running Home Assistant.

<div class='note'>
HAOS has no integrated installer that writes the image automatically. You must write it manually using a tool like Balena Etcher or the <b>Restore Disks</b> function from Ubuntu.
</div>

Typically an internal medium like S-ATA hard disk, S-ATA SSD, M.2 SSD, or a non-removable eMMC is used for the x86-64 boot medium. Alternatively, an external medium can be used such as a USB SDD, though this is not recommended.

To write the HAOS image to the boot medium on your x86-64 hardware, there are 2 different methods:

>   **Method 1**: Recommended method. It also works on laptops and PCs with internal hard disks. This method boots Ubuntu from a USB device and installs the Home Assistant Operating System from there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **Method 1**: Recommended method. It also works on laptops and PCs with internal hard disks. This method boots Ubuntu from a USB flash drive and installs the Home Assistant Operating System from there.
```

  **Method 2**: With this method, you write the Home Assistant Operating disk image directly onto a boot medium. The steps are a bit more complex. If you have non-removable internal mediums (for example because you are using a laptop) or do not have the necessary adapter (for example an USB to eMMC adapter) use method 1 instead.

> ### Method 1: Installing HAOS via Ubuntu from a USB device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Method 1: Installing HAOS via Ubuntu booting from a USB flash drive
```

#### Required material

- Computer
- The target x86-64 hardware, on which you want to install the Home Assistant Operating System (HAOS)

> - USB flash drive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- USB flash drive (USB thumb drive is sufficient, it should be at least 4GB in size)
```

- Internet connection

> #### To install HAOS via Ubuntu from a USB device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### To install HAOS via Ubuntu from a USB flash drive
```

</div>

Typically an internal medium like S-ATA hard disk, S-ATA SSD, M.2 SSD, or a non-removable eMMC is used for the x86-64 boot medium. Alternatively, an external medium can be used such as a USB SDD, though this is not recommended.

To write the HAOS image to the boot medium on your x86-64 hardware, there are 2 different methods:

  **Method 1**: Recommended method. It also works on laptops and PCs with internal hard disks. This method boots Ubuntu from a USB device and installs the Home Assistant Operating System from there.

  **Method 2**: With this method, you write the Home Assistant Operating disk image directly onto a boot medium. The steps are a bit more complex. If you have non-removable internal mediums (for example because you are using a laptop) or do not have the necessary adapter (for example an USB to eMMC adapter) use method 1 instead.

### Method 1: Installing HAOS via Ubuntu from a USB device

#### Required material

- Computer
- The target x86-64 hardware, on which you want to install the Home Assistant Operating System (HAOS)

> - USB device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- USB flash drive
```

- Internet connection

#### To install HAOS via Ubuntu from a USB device

1. **Notice**: This procedure will write the Home Assistant Operating System onto your device.
   - This means you will lose all the data as well as the previously installed operating system.
   - Back up your data before continuing with the next step.

> 2. Create a so called *live operating system* on a USB device:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create a so called *live operating system* on a USB flash drive:
```

   - Follow the ([Ubuntu instructions](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/try-ubuntu-before-you-install)) on writing an Ubuntu iso file onto a USB device.

> 3. Insert the USB device into the system on which you want to run Home Assistant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Insert the USB flash drive into the system on which you want to run Home Assistant.
```

   - Boot the live operating system.
   - The system then starts Ubuntu.
4. In Ubuntu, open a browser and download the image to your computer.

>       - Copy the URL for the image.

Reviewer: To be able to copy the URL the person need to navigate to this site. At that point we can just make it an actual link instead.

      - title: {{ variant.name }}
        content: |

          ```text
          {{release_url}}/{{site.data.version_data.hassos[variant.key]}}/haos_{{ variant.key }}-{{site.data.version_data.hassos[variant.key]}}.img.xz
          ```

          {% if variant.key == "odroid-n2" %}
          [Guide: Flashing Odroid-N2 using OTG-USB](/hassio/flashing_n2_otg/)
          {% elsif variant.key == "rpi4" or variant.key == "rpi3" %}
            _(64-bit is recommended)_
          {% endif %}

      {% endfor %}
      {% endtabbed_block %}
      {% else %}

      ```text
      {% assign board_key = site.installation.types[page.installation_type].variants[0].key %}
      {{release_url}}/{{site.data.version_data.hassos[board_key]}}/haos_{{ board_key }}-{{site.data.version_data.hassos[board_key]}}.img.xz
      ```

      {% endif %}

      _Select and copy the URL or use the "copy" button that appear when you hover it._

       - Paste the URL into your browser to start the download.

      {% endif %}

5. In Ubuntu, in the bottom left corner, select **Show Applications**.
6. In the applications, search and open **Disks** and start restoring the HOAS image:

>    1. In **Disks**, select the external USB device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. In **Disks**, on the left side, select the internal disk device you want to install HAOS onto.
```

   2. On top of the screen, select the three dots menu and select **Restore Disk Image...**.
      ![Restore disk image: select three dots menu](/images/installation/ubuntu_restore_disk_image.png)
   3. Select the image you just downloaded.
      ![Restore disk image: select three dots menu](/images/installation/select_haos.png)
   4. Select **Start Restoring...**.
      ![Restore disk image: select three dots menu](/images/installation/start_restoring.png)
   5. Confirm by selecting **Restore**.
      ![Restore disk image: select three dots menu](/images/installation/restore.png)
   6. In the partitions overview, you should now see the **hassos-boot** partition.

>       ![Restore disk image: select three dots menu](/images/installation/hassos_boot_partition.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>       - Select the **Play** button.

Reviewer: That is not necessary. The play button will mount that partition so you can edit things, but no touching/editing things required here.

You can ask the user to shutdown and remove the USB flash drive.

```suggestion
```

6. Select **Flash from file** and select the image you just downloaded.
   - Do not use **Flash from URL**. It does not work on some systems.

  ![Screenshot of the Etcher software showing flash from URL selected.](/images/installation/etcher1_file.png)
7. **Select target**.
![Screenshot of the Etcher software showing the select target button highlighted.](/images/installation/etcher3.png)
8. Select the boot medium ({{site.installation.types[page.installation_type].installation_media}}) you want to use for your installation.
![Screenshot of the Etcher software showing the targets available.](/images/installation/etcher4.png)
9. Select **Flash!** to start writing the image.
   - If the operation fails, decompress the .xz file and try again.
![Screenshot of the Etcher software showing the Flash button highlighted.](/images/installation/etcher5.png)
1.  When Balena Etcher has finished writing the image, you will see a confirmation.
![Screenshot of the Etcher software showing that the installation has completed.](/images/installation/etcher6.png)

### Start up your {{site.installation.types[page.installation_type].board}}

{% if page.installation_type == 'generic-x86-64' %}

> - If you used [Ubuntu's disk utility](/installation/generic-x86-64#method-1-installing-haos-via-ubuntu-booting-from-a-usb-flash-drive) for the installation, shut it down and remove the live operating system USB device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you used method 1 for the installation, make sure the USB flash drive is removed from the system.
```

> - If you used [Balena Etcher](/installation/generic-x86-64#method-2-installing-haos-directly-from-a-boot-medium), connect this back to your {{ site.installation.types[page.installation_type].board }} system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you used method 2 for the installation, install the boot medium into your x86-64 hardware.
```
